.. _gracepy-userguide:

GRACEpy Library
================

The `GRACEpy <https://github.com/GRACE-astro/GRACEpy>`_ library is a set of companion Python tools for the GRACE code. 

It includes visualization and data analysis utilities, a command line tool to manage simulation submission and creation, and a set of tools used to generate expressions in the GRACE code. 

Quickstart 
************

To install the libraries please download the code from the repository and, preferably within a virtual environment, run the following command 
in the repository's directory 

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install -e ./


Descriptors 
**************

XMF descriptors are light-weight aggregators of meta-data regarding the structure of HDF5 output from GRACE. They are needed to process the data both in ParaView and in Python. 

After installing the GRACEpy library you should be able to run the ``create_descriptor`` command. It's syntax goes as follows 

.. code-block:: bash

    create_descriptor <path_to_data> <descriptor_name> [--mode <mode>] [--filter <filter>]

The optional ``mode`` argument can be ``auto`` ``temporal`` ``spatial`` ``spherical`` (default ``auto``). This specifies what kind of data is being processed, 
with ``auto`` trying to detect it from the file names, ``temporal`` indicating that the descriptor should be a temporal collection of grids (i.e. a timeseries of volume files or surface files from a single surface), 
``spatial`` indicating that the files are a spatial collection (e.g. multiple surfaces) and ``spherical`` indicating that the data represents spherical surfaces. 

The filter argument allows you to pass a regular expression used to filter out filenames. 

When processing the data in Python you should almost always use a temporal collection, since this allows you to process time-series of 2D and 3D data. For example, if a directory contains xy, xz and yz data and you want 
to process the xy plane you would do 

.. code-block:: bash

    create_descriptor ./data_dir desc_xy --mode temporal --filter "*xy*"


GRACE tools 
*************

The ``grace_tools`` library is a collection of classes and functions designed to make it easier to analyze and plot data generated by GRACE. 

The data is ingested through XMF descriptors (see above), as follows 

.. code-block:: python 

    import grace_tools.vtk_reader_utils as gtv
    reader = gtv.grace_xmf_reader("descriptor.xmf")

This loads the metadata in Python, and is a lightweight operation to perform even for very large datasets. The reader itself is a complicated object, but its extensive interface makes it easy to handle. Firstly, you can query the available output times and variables with

.. code-block:: python 

    reader.available_times()
    # Output example: [0.0,1.0,2.0]
    reader.available_variables()
    # Output example: ["rho","vel"]

The main purpose of the reader is to output the data in a format that can be plotted or used in post-processing. The easiest way to do this is simply

.. code-block:: python 

    xyz,rho = reader.get_var("rho",time=1.0)
    # Output: xyz is an np.array with shape [ncells,3] containing cell-center coordinates 
    # and rho is an np.array of size [ncells] containing datapoints.

In VTK terms, the data is represented as an unstructured grid, so that it needs to be plotted using triangulations in ``matplotlib`` 

.. code-block:: python 

    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
    import matplotlib.tri as tri

    fig,ax = plt.subplots()
    # Create a triangulation of the cell-center locations
    triangulation = tri.Triangulation(xyz[:,0],xyz[:,1])
    # Plot data over the triangulation
    ax.tricontourf(triangulation,rho,cmap="inferno",levels=500)


The reader can also be used to slice 3D data along planes, cylinders, spheres etc. or to sample 3D and 2D data along a 1D line. 
This can be done as follows 

.. code-block:: python 

    # first point 
    p1 = np.array([x1,y1,z1])
    # second point 
    p2 = np.array([x2,y2,z2])
    # Sample along a line 
    xyz1D,rho1D = reader.get_var_1D_slice("rho", time, p1, p2, npoints)

This will again return a ``[npoints,3]`` array of coordinates, and the corresponding interpolated values. The line is constructed between ``p1`` and ``p2`` using ``npoints`` uniformly spaced points. 
Note that to obtain good results it is generally best to choose points and spacings which are well adapted to the numerical grid. 

Simpilot 
**********

``simpilot`` is a lean tool designed to aid the management of simulations with GRACE. It maintains a list of known HPC machines together with their environment file and example submission scripts. 
After an interactive user setup it can be used to set up a directory where a simulation will be performed as 

.. code-block:: bash 

    simpilot create --simname <simname> --machine <machine> --parameter_file <parfile> --executable <executable>


After which the simulation can be submitted to the queue 

.. code-block:: bash 

    simpilot submit --simname <simname> --walltime <hh:mm:ss> --nodes <n_nodes>

If the machine file contains information such as the memory per node, the number of GPUs/CPUs per node, this is sufficient. Otherwise those numbers need 
to be manually specified. See the help section of the ``simpilot`` command for detailed lists of options and defaults. 